# Electronic Tree of Life (eToL) Scripts
These scripts were generated by Xinyue Hu to accompany Hu et al. (1)

Objectives: To facilitate microbiome analysis through a method that does not require dedicated programs or deep bioinformatics expertise. For the most part, the eToL method is based on 64-mer probes that span the diversity of the Tree of Life.

## Scripts

### 1. Generate 64-mer probes
The probe.py is used to download the rRNA sequences of ToL organisms and make 64-mer probes. The raw 64-mer probe list has been filtered to remove the probes that are homologous to human sequences by BLAST. The detailed rational is explained in (1).

### 2. Abundance analysis 
EDDIE_ToL.sh uses the RNAseq dataset, SD001-17-AMYG_R1_001.fastq, as an example to show how the microbial abundance analysis is performed. The fastq format was converted to fasta format to make a blast-able database. BLAST was performed against RNA-seq dataset with eToL and control probe lists, respectively. 
  
Because different matches found in target tissues may have matches to different eToL probes, Abundance_ToL.py is used to remove duplicates, and a single RNA-seq sequence is allocaated to each probe. The matched RNAseq sequences were retrieved for BLAST against human sequences. 
  
Abundance_count.py was generated to remove the human homologous matches and count the number of matches for each ToL probe. For the control probes, the duplicates were removed and the number of matches for each probe counted.


(1) Hu, X., Haas, J, and Lathe, R. (2021) The electronic tree of life (eTOL): a net of long probes to characterize the human microbiome from RNA-seq data. BioRxiv. Insert DOI.

